SEN-12: Module 9 contents (incomplete, first draft). (#35)
IntersysConsulting/scala-essentials-nanodegree: src/main/tut/docs/module9.md

### For comprehensions

The following resources could be helpful:

- Module 7 material
- [Essential Scala], chapter 5
- [Better monadic for plugin]
- [For comprehensions] from Sam Halliday (@fommil)

[Essential Scala]: https://underscore.io/books/essential-scala/
[Better monadic for plugin]: https://github.com/oleg-py/better-monadic-for
[For comprehensions]: https://leanpub.com/fpmortals/read#leanpub-auto-for-comprehensions

### Using more precise types

If you have been practicing with Scala, it is probable that you have noticed that using precise
types reduces bugs. For example, given the following `Person` definition, you could possibly define
instances that do not model reality:

```scala
case class Person(name: String, age: Int)
// Bad input
val unrealPerson = Person("   ", -30)
```

because, arguably, a person's name cannot be "   ", and all ages are non-negative, and are
reasonably (arbitrarily) bounded by 127 (or 200, if you wish).

If it is possible, strive to use types that completely eliminate trivial bugs/errors. A simple way
to define more precise/refined types, is by using [Refined]. The above example could be rewritten
with:

```scala

> package io.github.oscarvarto

Reviewer: What if you define an "organizational" package like: `com.intersys.edge.scalananodegree`. Through commits inspection, people still will know that you're the author of this content.

Author: Yeah, it was a copy/paste mistake.

Author: Fixed.

import eu.timepit.refined.W
import eu.timepit.refined.api.Refined
import eu.timepit.refined.auto._
import eu.timepit.refined.boolean.{And, Not}
import eu.timepit.refined.char.Whitespace
import eu.timepit.refined.collection.{Forall, NonEmpty}
import eu.timepit.refined.numeric.Interval

// A person must have a NonEmpty name and a non-negative age.
object RefinedExample {
  type AgeAux = Interval.Closed[W.`0`.T, W.`127`.T]
  case class Age(n: Int Refined AgeAux)

  type NameAux = NonEmpty And Not[Forall[Whitespace]]
  case class Name(value: String Refined NameAux)

  case class Person(name: Name, age: Age)
  val spiderman = Person(Name("Peter Parker"), Age(25))
}
```

Now, if we have an instance of `Person`, we are sure that it has a name that is not blank, and has a
valid age (according to above definition).

[Refined]: https://github.com/fthomas/refined

> ### Adding/extending types with convenient syntax with implicit classes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Adding/extending types with convenient syntax though implicit classes
```

Author: Fixed using `through`

One possible way to define a new operation on an existing type is to create an utility method inside
a (singleton) object:

```scala
object StringUtilities {
  /** Returns true if not empty and every character is whitespace
    *
    * @note using scala APIs
    */
  def isWhitespaceOnly(s: String): Boolean =
    s.nonEmpty && s.forall(_.isWhitespace)
}
```

> Then you have to use the method as usual:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then you can use the method as usual:
```

Author: Fixed

```scala
import StringUtilities._

val name: String = "   "
// call site
val b = isWhiteSpaceOnly(name)
```

Calling the method with the convenient syntax `instance.method()` could be achieved with
"implicit classes":

```scala
import scalaz.syntax.std.string.ToStringOpsFromString

object stringsyntax {

>   implicit class StringExtraOps(s: String) {

Reviewer: Class' closing bracket is missing.

Author: Thanks again! Fixed.

val b = name.isWhitespaceOnly
```

See [Implicit classes documentation] for more details.

[Implicit classes documentation]: https://docs.scala-lang.org/overviews/core/implicit-classes.html

******

#### Note: Using Java's SAM methods from Scala

Next snippet contains an alternative (using Java's 8+ APIs) implementation for `isWhitespaceOnly`
"extension" method. Take a look at the scaladoc for more information.

```scala
object stringsyntax {
  implicit class StringExtraOps(s: String) {
    /** Returns true if not empty and every character is whitespace
      *
      * @note using Java APIs
      *
      * @note using lambda syntax for SAM types
      * @see https://www.scala-lang.org/news/2.12.0/#lambda-syntax-for-sam-types
      * @see https://www.scala-lang.org/files/archive/spec/2.12/06-expressions.html#sam-conversion
      */
    def isWhitespaceOnly: Boolean = {
      !s.isEmpty &&
        s.chars().allMatch(Character.isWhitespace(_))
    }
  }
}
```

******

## Smart constructors

Other possibility to avoid nonsensical data, and to enforce business/reality rules, is to use the
"smart constructor" pattern. We are explaining the basics here, and in future sections will get a

> (alledgedlly) better encoding of the pattern. We want to **enforce correctness by construction**.

Reviewer: N E A T👌

will stick to the simpler variant illustrated above with `Age`.

[Case Classes w/ Smart Ctors]: https://gist.github.com/tpolecat/a5cb0dc9adeacc93f846835ed21c92d2
[Enforcing invariants in Scala datatypes]: https://www.cakesolutions.net/teamblogs/enforcing-invariants-in-scala-datatypes

### `NonEmptyList` data structure

Scalaz defines a `NonEmtyList[T]` that can be useful for its non-emtyness property. In the context
of our discussion on enforcing invariants, we will use it to accumulate the errors that arise
during validation of business rules.

That is, if there were problems/validation errors, you should have at least one of them. If there
were no errors, you should be able to get a valid instance. We will use the following rules to model
a person's name:

- A name cannot be empty
- A name cannot be whitespace only

The following ADT (Algebraic Data Type) models the errors that result from violation of the
aforementioned rules:

```scala
sealed trait NameError
case object NameCannotBeEmpty extends NameError
case object NameCannotBeWhitespaceOnly extends NameError
```

So, given an input `String`, the following type models what could happen during validation of a
name:

```scala

> Either[NonEmptyList[NameError, Name]]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Either[NonEmptyList[NameError], Name]
```

Author: Thanks for the sharp eye. Fixed.
